<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II: The Golden Dustman Rises a Little</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-4" id="chapter-4-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">The Golden Dustman Rises a Little</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle had come to breakfast with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Boffin. They were not absolutely uninvited, but had pressed themselves with so much urgency on the golden couple, that evasion of the honour and pleasure of their company would have been difficult, if desired. They were in a charming state of mind, were <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle, and almost as fond of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Boffin as of one another.</p>
			<p>“My dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Boffin,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle, “it imparts new life to me, to see my Alfred in confidential communication with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin. The two were formed to become intimate. So much simplicity combined with so much force of character, such natural sagacity united to such amiability and gentleness⁠—these are the distinguishing characteristics of both.”</p>
			<p>This being said aloud, gave <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lammle an opportunity, as he came with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin from the window to the breakfast table, of taking up his dear and honoured wife.</p>
			<p>“My Sophronia,” said that gentleman, “your too partial estimate of your husband’s character⁠—”</p>
			<p>“No! Not too partial, Alfred,” urged the lady, tenderly moved; “never say that.”</p>
			<p>“My child, your favourable opinion, then, of your husband⁠—you don’t object to that phrase, darling?”</p>
			<p>“How can I, Alfred?”</p>
			<p>“Your favourable opinion then, my Precious, does less than justice to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin, and more than justice to me.”</p>
			<p>“To the first charge, Alfred, I plead guilty. But to the second, oh no, no!”</p>
			<p>“Less than justice to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin, Sophronia,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lammle, soaring into a tone of moral grandeur, “because it represents <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin as on my lower level; more than justice to me, Sophronia, because it represents me as on <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin’s higher level. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin bears and forbears far more than I could.”</p>
			<p>“Far more than you could for yourself, Alfred?”</p>
			<p>“My love, that is not the question.”</p>
			<p>“Not the question, lawyer?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle, archly.</p>
			<p>“No, dear Sophronia. From my lower level, I regard <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin as too generous, as possessed of too much clemency, as being too good to persons who are unworthy of him and ungrateful to him. To those noble qualities I can lay no claim. On the contrary, they rouse my indignation when I see them in action.”</p>
			<p>“Alfred!”</p>
			<p>“They rouse my indignation, my dear, against the unworthy persons, and give me a combative desire to stand between <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin and all such persons. Why? Because, in my lower nature I am more worldly and less delicate. Not being so magnanimous as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin, I feel his injuries more than he does himself, and feel more capable of opposing his injurers.”</p>
			<p>It struck <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle that it appeared rather difficult this morning to bring <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Boffin into agreeable conversation. Here had been several lures thrown out, and neither of them had uttered a word. Here were she, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle, and her husband discoursing at once affectingly and effectively, but discoursing alone. Assuming that the dear old creatures were impressed by what they heard, still one would like to be sure of it, the more so, as at least one of the dear old creatures was somewhat pointedly referred to. If the dear old creatures were too bashful or too dull to assume their required places in the discussion, why then it would seem desirable that the dear old creatures should be taken by their heads and shoulders and brought into it.</p>
			<p>“But is not my husband saying in effect,” asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle, therefore, with an innocent air, of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Boffin, “that he becomes unmindful of his own temporary misfortunes in his admiration of another whom he is burning to serve? And is not that making an admission that his nature is a generous one? I am wretched in argument, but surely this is so, dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Boffin?”</p>
			<p>Still, neither <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Boffin said a word. He sat with his eyes on his plate, eating his muffins and ham, and she sat shyly looking at the teapot. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle’s innocent appeal was merely thrown into the air, to mingle with the steam of the urn. Glancing towards <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Boffin, she very slightly raised her eyebrows, as though inquiring of her husband: “Do I notice anything wrong here?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lammle, who had found his chest effective on a variety of occasions, manoeuvred his capacious shirt front into the largest demonstration possible, and then smiling retorted on his wife, thus:</p>
			<p>“Sophronia, darling, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Boffin will remind you of the old adage, that self-praise is no recommendation.”</p>
			<p>“Self-praise, Alfred? Do you mean because we are one and the same?”</p>
			<p>“No, my dear child. I mean that you cannot fail to remember, if you reflect for a single moment, that what you are pleased to compliment me upon feeling in the case of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin, you have yourself confided to me as your own feeling in the case of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Boffin.”</p>
			<p>(“I shall be beaten by this lawyer,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle gaily whispered to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Boffin. “I am afraid I must admit it, if he presses me, for it’s damagingly true.”)</p>
			<p>Several white dints began to come and go about <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lammle’s nose, as he observed that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Boffin merely looked up from the teapot for a moment with an embarrassed smile, which was no smile, and then looked down again.</p>
			<p>“Do you admit the charge, Sophronia?” inquired Alfred, in a rallying tone.</p>
			<p>“Really, I think,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle, still gaily, “I must throw myself on the protection of the Court. Am I bound to answer that question, my Lord?” To <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin.</p>
			<p>“You needn’t, if you don’t like, ma’am,” was his answer. “It’s not of the least consequence.”</p>
			<p>Both husband and wife glanced at him, very doubtfully. His manner was grave, but not coarse, and derived some dignity from a certain repressed dislike of the tone of the conversation.</p>
			<p>Again <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle raised her eyebrows for instruction from her husband. He replied in a slight nod, “Try ’em again.”</p>
			<p>“To protect myself against the suspicion of covert self-laudation, my dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Boffin,” said the airy <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle therefore, “I must tell you how it was.”</p>
			<p>“No. Pray don’t,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin interposed.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle turned to him laughingly. “The Court objects?”</p>
			<p>“Ma’am,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin, “the Court (if I am the Court) does object. The Court objects for two reasons. First, because the Court don’t think it fair. Secondly, because the dear old lady, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Court (if I am <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>) gets distressed by it.”</p>
			<p>A very remarkable wavering between two bearings⁠—between her propitiatory bearing there, and her defiant bearing at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Twemlow’s⁠—was observable on the part of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle as she said:</p>
			<p>“What does the Court not consider fair?”</p>
			<p>“Letting you go on,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin, nodding his head soothingly, as who should say, we won’t be harder on you than we can help; we’ll make the best of it. “It’s not aboveboard and it’s not fair. When the old lady is uncomfortable, there’s sure to be good reason for it. I see she is uncomfortable, and I plainly see this is the good reason wherefore. <em>Have</em> you breakfasted, ma’am?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle, settling into her defiant manner, pushed her plate away, looked at her husband, and laughed; but by no means gaily.</p>
			<p>“Have <em>you</em> breakfasted, sir?” inquired <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin.</p>
			<p>“Thank you,” replied Alfred, showing all his teeth. “If <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Boffin will oblige me, I’ll take another cup of tea.”</p>
			<p>He spilled a little of it over the chest which ought to have been so effective, and which had done so little; but on the whole drank it with something of an air, though the coming and going dints got almost as large, the while, as if they had been made by pressure of the teaspoon. “A thousand thanks,” he then observed. “I have breakfasted.”</p>
			<p>“Now, which,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin softly, taking out a pocketbook, “which of you two is cashier?”</p>
			<p>“Sophronia, my dear,” remarked her husband, as he leaned back in his chair, waving his right hand towards her, while he hung his left hand by the thumb in the armhole of his waistcoat: “it shall be your department.”</p>
			<p>“I would rather,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin, “that it was your husband’s, ma’am, because⁠—but never mind, because, I would rather have to do with him. However, what I have to say, I will say with as little offence as possible; if I can say it without any, I shall be heartily glad. You two have done me a service, a very great service, in doing what you did (my old lady knows what it was), and I have put into this envelope a bank note for a hundred pound. I consider the service well worth a hundred pound, and I am well pleased to pay the money. Would you do me the favour to take it, and likewise to accept my thanks?”</p>
			<p>With a haughty action, and without looking towards him, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle held out her left hand, and into it <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin put the little packet. When she had conveyed it to her bosom, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lammle had the appearance of feeling relieved, and breathing more freely, as not having been quite certain that the hundred pounds were his, until the note had been safely transferred out of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin’s keeping into his own Sophronia’s.</p>
			<p>“It is not impossible,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin, addressing Alfred, “that you have had some general idea, sir, of replacing Rokesmith, in course of time?”</p>
			<p>“It is not,” assented Alfred, with a glittering smile and a great deal of nose, “not impossible.”</p>
			<p>“And perhaps, ma’am,” pursued <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin, addressing Sophronia, “you have been so kind as to take up my old lady in your own mind, and to do her the honour of turning the question over whether you mightn’t one of these days have her in charge, like? Whether you mightn’t be a sort of Miss Bella Wilfer to her, and something more?”</p>
			<p>“I should hope,” returned <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle, with a scornful look and in a loud voice, “that if I were anything to your wife, sir, I could hardly fail to be something more than Miss Bella Wilfer, as you call her.”</p>
			<p>“What do <em>you</em> call her, ma’am?” asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle disdained to reply, and sat defiantly beating one foot on the ground.</p>
			<p>“Again I think I may say, that’s not impossible. Is it, sir?” asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin, turning to Alfred.</p>
			<p>“It is not,” said Alfred, smiling assent as before, “not impossible.”</p>
			<p>“Now,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin, gently, “it won’t do. I don’t wish to say a single word that might be afterwards remembered as unpleasant; but it won’t do.”</p>
			<p>“Sophronia, my love,” her husband repeated in a bantering manner, “you hear? It won’t do.”</p>
			<p>“No,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin, with his voice still dropped, “it really won’t. You positively must excuse us. If you’ll go your way, we’ll go ours, and so I hope this affair ends to the satisfaction of all parties.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle gave him the look of a decidedly dissatisfied party demanding exemption from the category; but said nothing.</p>
			<p>“The best thing we can make of the affair,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin, “is a matter of business, and as a matter of business it’s brought to a conclusion. You have done me a great service, a very great service, and I have paid for it. Is there any objection to the price?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle looked at one another across the table, but neither could say that there was. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lammle shrugged his shoulders, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle sat rigid.</p>
			<p>“Very good,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin. “We hope (my old lady and me) that you’ll give us credit for taking the plainest and honestest shortcut that could be taken under the circumstances. We have talked it over with a deal of care (my old lady and me), and we have felt that at all to lead you on, or even at all to let you go on of your own selves, wouldn’t be the right thing. So, I have openly given you to understand that⁠—” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin sought for a new turn of speech, but could find none so expressive as his former one, repeated in a confidential tone, “⁠—that it won’t do. If I could have put the case more pleasantly I would; but I hope I haven’t put it very unpleasantly; at all events I haven’t meant to. So,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin, by way of peroration, “wishing you well in the way you go, we now conclude with the observation that perhaps you’ll go it.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lammle rose with an impudent laugh on his side of the table, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle rose with a disdainful frown on hers. At this moment a hasty foot was heard on the staircase, and Georgiana Podsnap broke into the room, unannounced and in tears.</p>
			<p>“Oh, my dear Sophronia,” cried Georgiana, wringing her hands as she ran up to embrace her, “to think that you and Alfred should be ruined! Oh, my poor dear Sophronia, to think that you should have had a sale at your house after all your kindness to me! Oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Boffin, pray forgive me for this intrusion, but you don’t know how fond I was of Sophronia when Pa wouldn’t let me go there any more, or what I have felt for Sophronia since I heard from Ma of her having been brought low in the world. You don’t, you can’t, you never can, think, how I have lain awake at night and cried for my good Sophronia, my first and only friend!”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle’s manner changed under the poor silly girl’s embraces, and she turned extremely pale: directing one appealing look, first to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Boffin, and then to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin. Both understood her instantly, with a more delicate subtlety than much better educated people, whose perception came less directly from the heart, could have brought to bear upon the case.</p>
			<p>“I haven’t a minute,” said poor little Georgiana, “to stay. I am out shopping early with Ma, and I said I had a headache and got Ma to leave me outside in the phaeton, in Piccadilly, and ran round to Sackville Street, and heard that Sophronia was here, and then Ma came to see, oh such a dreadful old stony woman from the country in a turban in Portland Place, and I said I wouldn’t go up with Ma but would drive round and leave cards for the Boffins, which is taking a liberty with the name; but oh my goodness I am distracted, and the phaeton’s at the door, and what would Pa say if he knew it!”</p>
			<p>“Don’t ye be timid, my dear,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Boffin. “You came in to see us.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no, I didn’t,” cried Georgiana. “It’s very impolite, I know, but I came to see my poor Sophronia, my only friend. Oh! how I felt the separation, my dear Sophronia, before I knew you were brought low in the world, and how much more I feel it now!”</p>
			<p>There were actually tears in the bold woman’s eyes, as the soft-headed and softhearted girl twined her arms about her neck.</p>
			<p>“But I’ve come on business,” said Georgiana, sobbing and drying her face, and then searching in a little reticule, “and if I don’t despatch it I shall have come for nothing, and oh good gracious! what would Pa say if he knew of Sackville Street, and what would Ma say if she was kept waiting on the doorsteps of that dreadful turban, and there never were such pawing horses as ours unsettling my mind every moment more and more when I want more mind than I have got, by pawing up <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin’s street where they have no business to be. Oh! where is, where is it? Oh! I can’t find it!” All this time sobbing, and searching in the little reticule.</p>
			<p>“What do you miss, my dear?” asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin, stepping forward.</p>
			<p>“Oh! it’s little enough,” replied Georgiana, “because Ma always treats me as if I was in the nursery (I am sure I wish I was!), but I hardly ever spend it and it has mounted up to fifteen pounds, Sophronia, and I hope three five-pound notes are better than nothing, though so little, so little! And now I have found that⁠—oh, my goodness! there’s the other gone next! Oh no, it isn’t, here it is!”</p>
			<p>With that, always sobbing and searching in the reticule, Georgiana produced a necklace.</p>
			<p>“Ma says chits and jewels have no business together,” pursued Georgiana, “and that’s the reason why I have no trinkets except this, but I suppose my aunt Hawkinson was of a different opinion, because she left me this, though I used to think she might just as well have buried it, for it’s always kept in jewellers’ cotton. However, here it is, I am thankful to say, and of use at last, and you’ll sell it, dear Sophronia, and buy things with it.”</p>
			<p>“Give it to me,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin, gently taking it. “I’ll see that it’s properly disposed of.”</p>
			<p>“Oh! are you such a friend of Sophronia’s, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin?” cried Georgiana. “Oh, how good of you! Oh, my gracious! there was something else, and it’s gone out of my head! Oh no, it isn’t, I remember what it was. My grandmamma’s property, that’ll come to me when I am of age, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin, will be all my own, and neither Pa nor Ma nor anybody else will have any control over it, and what I wish to do it so make some of it over somehow to Sophronia and Alfred, by signing something somewhere that’ll prevail on somebody to advance them something. I want them to have something handsome to bring them up in the world again. Oh, my goodness me! Being such a friend of my dear Sophronia’s, you won’t refuse me, will you?”</p>
			<p>“No, no,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin, “it shall be seen to.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, thank you, thank you!” cried Georgiana. “If my maid had a little note and half a crown, I could run round to the pastrycook’s to sign something, or I could sign something in the Square if somebody would come and cough for me to let ’em in with the key, and would bring a pen and ink with ’em and a bit of blotting-paper. Oh, my gracious! I must tear myself away, or Pa and Ma will both find out! Dear, dear Sophronia, good, goodbye!”</p>
			<p>The credulous little creature again embraced <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle most affectionately, and then held out her hand to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lammle.</p>
			<p>“Goodbye, dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lammle⁠—I mean Alfred. You won’t think after today that I have deserted you and Sophronia because you have been brought low in the world, will you? Oh me! oh me! I have been crying my eyes out of my head, and Ma will be sure to ask me what’s the matter. Oh, take me down, somebody, please, please, please!”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin took her down, and saw her driven away, with her poor little red eyes and weak chin peering over the great apron of the custard-coloured phaeton, as if she had been ordered to expiate some childish misdemeanour by going to bed in the daylight, and were peeping over the counterpane in a miserable flutter of repentance and low spirits. Returning to the breakfast-room, he found <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle still standing on her side of the table, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lammle on his.</p>
			<p>“I’ll take care,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin, showing the money and the necklace, “that these are soon given back.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle had taken up her parasol from a side table, and stood sketching with it on the pattern of the damask cloth, as she had sketched on the pattern of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Twemlow’s papered wall.</p>
			<p>“You will not undeceive her I hope, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin?” she said, turning her head towards him, but not her eyes.</p>
			<p>“No,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin.</p>
			<p>“I mean, as to the worth and value of her friend,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle explained, in a measured voice, and with an emphasis on her last word.</p>
			<p>“No,” he returned. “I may try to give a hint at her home that she is in want of kind and careful protection, but I shall say no more than that to her parents, and I shall say nothing to the young lady herself.”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Boffin,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle, still sketching, and seeming to bestow great pains upon it, “there are not many people, I think, who, under the circumstances, would have been so considerate and sparing as you have been to me just now. Do you care to be thanked?”</p>
			<p>“Thanks are always worth having,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Boffin, in her ready good nature.</p>
			<p>“Then thank you both.”</p>
			<p>“Sophronia,” asked her husband, mockingly, “are you sentimental?”</p>
			<p>“Well, well, my good sir,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin interposed, “it’s a very good thing to think well of another person, and it’s a very good thing to be thought well of <em>by</em> another person. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle will be none the worse for it, if she is.”</p>
			<p>“Much obliged. But I asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lammle if she was.”</p>
			<p>She stood sketching on the tablecloth, with her face clouded and set, and was silent.</p>
			<p>“Because,” said Alfred, “I am disposed to be sentimental myself, on your appropriation of the jewels and the money, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin. As our little Georgiana said, three five-pound notes are better than nothing, and if you sell a necklace you can buy things with the produce.”</p>
			<p>“<em>If</em> you sell it,” was <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin’s comment, as he put it in his pocket.</p>
			<p>Alfred followed it with his looks, and also greedily pursued the notes until they vanished into <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boffin’s waistcoat pocket. Then he directed a look, half exasperated and half jeering, at his wife. She still stood sketching; but, as she sketched, there was a struggle within her, which found expression in the depth of the few last lines the parasol point indented into the tablecloth, and then some tears fell from her eyes.</p>
			<p>“Why, confound the woman,” exclaimed Lammle, “she <em>is</em> sentimental!”</p>
			<p>She walked to the window, flinching under his angry stare, looked out for a moment, and turned round quite coldly.</p>
			<p>“You have had no former cause of complaint on the sentimental score, Alfred, and you will have none in future. It is not worth your noticing. We go abroad soon, with the money we have earned here?”</p>
			<p>“You know we do; you know we must.”</p>
			<p>“There is no fear of my taking any sentiment with me. I should soon be eased of it, if I did. But it will be all left behind. It <em>is</em> all left behind. Are you ready, Alfred?”</p>
			<p>“What the deuce have I been waiting for but you, Sophronia?”</p>
			<p>“Let us go then. I am sorry I have delayed our dignified departure.”</p>
			<p>She passed out and he followed her. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Boffin had the curiosity softly to raise a window and look after them as they went down the long street. They walked arm-in-arm, showily enough, but without appearing to interchange a syllable. It might have been fanciful to suppose that under their outer bearing there was something of the shamed air of two cheats who were linked together by concealed handcuffs; but, not so, to suppose that they were haggardly weary of one another, of themselves, and of all this world. In turning the street corner they might have turned out of this world, for anything <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Boffin ever saw of them to the contrary; for, they set eyes on the Lammles never more.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
